**What is a DMA Controller?**
Direct Memory Access uses hardware for accessing the memory, that hardware is called a DMA Controller. It has the work of transferring the data between Input Output devices and main memory with very less interaction with the processor. 
The direct Memory Access Controller is a control unit, which has the work of transferring data.

**Types of Direct Memory Access (DMA)**

**Single-Ended DMA**: Single-Ended DMA Controllers operate by reading and writing from a single memory address. They are the simplest DMA.

**Dual-Ended DMA**: Dual-Ended DMA controllers can read and write from two memory addresses. Dual-ended DMA is more advanced than single-ended DMA.

**Arbitrated-Ended DMA**: Arbitrated-Ended DMA works by reading and writing to several memory addresses. It is more advanced than Dual-Ended DMA.

**Interleaved DMA**: Interleaved DMA are those DMA that read from one memory address and write from another memory address.

The DMA controller registers have three registers as follows.

**Address register** – It contains the address to specify the desired location in memory.
**Word count register** – It contains the number of words to be transferred.
**Control register** – It specifies the transfer mode.

1. The unit communicates with the CPU through the data bus and control lines.
2. Through the use of the address bus and allowing the DMA and RS (Register Select) register to select inputs, the register within the DMA is chosen by the CPU.
3. RD and WR are two-way inputs.
4. When BG (bus grant) input is 0, the CPU can communicate with DMA registers. When BG (bus grant) input is 1, the CPU has relinquished the buses and DMA can communicate directly with the memory.

The CPU initializes the DMA by sending the given information through the data bus.

1. The starting address of the memory block where the data is available (to read) or where data are to be stored (to write).
2. It also sends word count which is the number of words in the memory block to be read or written.
3. Control to define the mode of transfer such as read or write.
4. A control to begin the DMA transfer

**Modes of Data Transfer in DMA**
**Burst Mode**: In Burst Mode, buses are handed over to the CPU by the DMA if the whole data is completely transferred, not before that.
**Cycle Stealing Mode**: In Cycle Stealing Mode, buses are handed over to the CPU by the DMA after the transfer of each byte. Continuous request for bus control is generated by this Data Transfer Mode. It works more easily for higher-priority tasks.
**Transparent Mode**: Transparent Mode in DMA does not require any bus in the transfer of the data as it works when the CPU is executing the transaction.

**Advantages of DMA Controller**
Data Memory Access speeds up memory operations and data transfer.
CPU is not involved while transferring data.
DMA requires very few clock cycles while transferring data.
DMA distributes workload very appropriately.
DMA helps the CPU in decreasing its load.

**Disadvantages of DMA Controller**
Direct Memory Access is a costly operation because of additional operations.
DMA suffers from Cache-Coherence Problems.
DMA Controller increases the overall cost of the system.
DMA Controller increases the complexity of the software.

**DVMA:** 
It is a feature in which memory transfer is done by using virtual addresses( internally which are translated into physical address). 
It extends the concept of DMA to the address spaces that involve the memory mapped I/O in virtual memory system.

**Different transfer modes supported are:**

**Basic mode**: In Basic mode, the µDMA controller performs transfers as long as there are more items to transfer,and a transfer request is present. This mode is used with peripherals that assert a µDMA request signal whenever the peripheral is ready for a data transfer.
**Auto Mode**: Auto mode is similar to Basic mode, except that once a transfer request is received, the transfer runs to completion, even if the µDMA request is removed. This mode is suitable for software-triggered transfers. Generally, Auto mode is not used with a peripheral.
**Ping-pong Mode**: Ping-Pong mode is used to support a continuous data flow to or from a peripheral. To use Ping-Pong mode, both the primary and alternate data structures must be implemented. Both structures are set up by the processor for data transfer between memory and a peripheral. The transfer is started using the primary control structure. When the transfer using the primary control structure is complete,the µDMA controller reads the alternate control structure for that channel to continue the transfer.Each time this happens, an interrupt is generated, and the processor can reload the control structure for the just-completed transfer.
**Scatter-gather Mode**: Memory Scatter-Gather mode is a complex mode used when data must be transferred to or from varied locations in memory instead of a set of contiguous locations in a memory buffer.

Reference: https://software-dl.ti.com/ecs/CC3200SDK/1_5_0/exports/cc3200-sdk/example/udma/README.html
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/direct-memory-access-dma-controller-in-computer-architecture/
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/direct-memory-access/
